README.md, before:

# English Learner Detector / CELDT Project

This repository contains scripts for detecting English learner information from student transcripts in image or PDF format.  
The program reads PDFs and image files, extracts relevant text using OCR, and identifies CELDT and ELPAC data.

---


## 🚀 How to Use

To run the program, execute the following command from your terminal:

```bash
python main.py run all [folder_name]
```
usage example:
python main.py run all Transcripts

Note:
Each run overwrites the existing text_output.txt and csv_output.csv files.
If you want to preserve results from previous runs, move or rename those files before running the program again.


## This code is adapted from the previous Fontana District code, and so shows the old versions 
## that were part of that old codebase, and then shows the versions associated with this repository
## that begins on February 16, 2026

## -OLD- Version History (from when this was developed for Fontana school district)

### 🧩 Version 0.01 — *March 3, 2025*
**Repository:** `English_Learner_Detector`  
- Supported formats: **PDF, PNG, JPG** (page one only)  
- Used simple string matching to detect English learner status  
- Did **not** support TIFF files  
- Search strings stored in `English_Learner_Detector.py` (easy to modify)

---

### 🧩 Version 0.02 — *March 24, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supported format: **PDF only**  
- Added basic CELDT and ELPAC detection  
- Did not search for any other class-related strings  
- Specialized search method stored in `check_for_CELDT.py` (not yet user-modifiable)  
- The initial commit works; later attempts to extend to PNG/JPG (April 11–14) introduced errors

---

### 🧩 Version 0.03 — *October 14, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information  
- **Known Bug:**  
  - Occasional `list index` error on certain transcripts

---

### 🧩 Version 0.04 — *December 18, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Fixed a bug in one of the loops in FinalizeColumns.py that would access an out-of-range index

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05 — *December 22, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Fixed a variety of bugs including accessing NONE data type, index out-of-range errors, corrected header detection method and updated .png standardization method
- Got the new Algorithm Detection method to work by increasing the minimum pixel count threshold to 10,000
- Has simple file-processing time tracker

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.1 — *December 23, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Improved per-file time tracking output structure

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.2 — *December 23, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Can now use either new or old column algorithm by setting bool at top of utils.py, USE_NEW_COLUMN_ALGORITHM
- **Known Bug:**  
  - Running program the first time CAN cause a whole slew of errors that disapper upon the second run. (Presumably this has to do with initializing EasyOCR)
---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.3 — *December 23, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- More detailed time output
- **Known Bug:**  
  - Running program the first time CAN cause a whole slew of errors that disapper upon the second run. (Presumably this has to do with initializing EasyOCR)
---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.4 — *January 11, 2026*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- **Renamed: **
        check_for_CELDT.py => check_for_CELDT_and_ELPAC.py
        rowUtilsNew.py => Row_Utilities.py
        AltFinColsHolder.py => New_Column_Algorithm.py
        FinalizeColumns.py => Old_Column_Algorithm.py
- cleaned up the code removing many print lines and removing unused commented-out code
- removed the datetime import from the utils.py file
- Moved the EasyOCR initialization line to outside of the loop in utils.py to stop redundant calls and also to hopefully fix the presumed initialization bug

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.5 — *January 13, 2026*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Now also produces a tsv file, tsv_output.txt (has identical info to the csv file)

---

### NEW versions below:

### 🧩 PSUSD Version 1.0 — *February 16, 2026*
**Repository:** `PSUSD`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- entry / exit dates are extracted using the PSUSD transcripts terms of "enter" and "graduation" dates
- column detection algorithm now uses >= for the left side column instead of just >
- has added a simple string search for CELDT and ELPAC, so even if later algo fails then we can still determine that CELDT and ELPAC exist

---

## 🏗️ Basic Architecture (Version 0.05.3)

The project consists of **five main functional files:**

---

### `main.py`
- Handles command-line input  
- Iterates through target folder files  
- Calls `process_image()` from `utils.py`
- tracks time stamps for each file

---

### `utils.py`
- Contains the main `process_image()` method  
- Imports utilities from `Row_Utilities.py`, `Old_Column_Algorithm.py`, and `check_for_CELDT_and_ELPAC.py`  
      (previously named `rowUtilsNew.py`, `FinalizeColumns.py`, and `check_for_CELDT.py`)
- Determines file type and routes it to `process_png()`, `process_jpg()`, or `process_pdf()`  

**Process Flow:**  
1. Converts each file to a standardized `.png` format using `pdf_to_png()`, `standardize_png()`, or `jpg_to_png()`  
2. Sends the standardized PNG to `extract_data()`  
3. For multi-page PDFs, also processes the final page and appends its results  

**`extract_data()` workflow:**  
- Runs OCR via `run_OCR()` and stores results in JSON (`convert_OCR_page_result_to_JSON()`)  
- Detects transfer worksheets using `check_for_transfer_worksheet()`  
- Cleans the image (removes text/top/bottom regions) using `removeText()`, `removeTop()`, `remove_img_bottom()`  
- Computes vertical black pixel projection (`blackPixProjProfile`)  
- Determines column positions using `check_predicted_column_values()` from `Old_Column_Algorithm.py` or `detect_four_columns` from `New_Column_Algorithm.py` (Chooses which method to use based on `USE_NEW_COLUMN_ALGORITHM` bool)
- Finds text rows via `findTextRows()`  
- Extracts entry and exit dates with `extract_entry_and_exit_dates()`  

**Returns:**  
`rows, OCR_Data_Path, transfer_worksheet_found, entry_date, exit_date, celdt_string, elpac_string`

---

### `Row_Utilities.py` formerly `rowUtilsNew.py`
- Core module for row and column analysis  
- Exports:
  - `check_header_rows_2_and_3()` *(legacy, can remove)*
  - `findTextRows()`
  - `findMatchingRowPatterns()`
- `findMatchingRowPatterns()` locates row boundaries based on course headers  
- `findTextRows()` uses OCR JSON + column positions to assign text into columns

---

### `Old_Column_Algorithm.py` formerly `FinalizeColumns.py`
- Contains `check_predicted_column_values()`  
- Uses black pixel projection profiles to identify and verify column boundaries

### `New_Column_Algorithm.py` formerly `AltFinColsHolder.py`
- Contains `check_predicted_column_values()`  
- Uses black pixel projection profiles to identify and verify column boundaries
- More efficient AND better written than the `Old_Column_Algorithm.py` counterpart

---

### `check_for_CELDT_and_ELPAC.py` formerly `check_for_CELDT.py`
- Contains `check_CELDT_ELPAC_status()`  
- Extracts CELDT and ELPAC data from text rows
- Also contains `Generic_CELDT_ELPAC_String_Check()` which simply checks the JSON OCR data for string matching

---

## 🐞 Known Issues
- No currently known issues

---

*Last Updated: February 16, 2026 (PSUSD Version 1.0)*

Commit message:

Added caching for each files data result. Will use the caches to skip processing the data on subsequent runs

README.md, after:

# English Learner Detector / CELDT Project

This repository contains scripts for detecting English learner information from student transcripts in image or PDF format.  
The program reads PDFs and image files, extracts relevant text using OCR, and identifies CELDT and ELPAC data.

---


## 🚀 How to Use

To run the program, execute the following command from your terminal:

```bash
python main.py run all [folder_name]
```
usage example:
python main.py run all Transcripts

Note:
Each run overwrites the existing text_output.txt and csv_output.csv files.
If you want to preserve results from previous runs, move or rename those files before running the program again.


## This code is adapted from the previous Fontana District code, and so shows the old versions 
## that were part of that old codebase, and then shows the versions associated with this repository
## that begins on February 16, 2026

## -OLD- Version History (from when this was developed for Fontana school district)

### 🧩 Version 0.01 — *March 3, 2025*
**Repository:** `English_Learner_Detector`  
- Supported formats: **PDF, PNG, JPG** (page one only)  
- Used simple string matching to detect English learner status  
- Did **not** support TIFF files  
- Search strings stored in `English_Learner_Detector.py` (easy to modify)

---

### 🧩 Version 0.02 — *March 24, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supported format: **PDF only**  
- Added basic CELDT and ELPAC detection  
- Did not search for any other class-related strings  
- Specialized search method stored in `check_for_CELDT.py` (not yet user-modifiable)  
- The initial commit works; later attempts to extend to PNG/JPG (April 11–14) introduced errors

---

### 🧩 Version 0.03 — *October 14, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information  
- **Known Bug:**  
  - Occasional `list index` error on certain transcripts

---

### 🧩 Version 0.04 — *December 18, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Fixed a bug in one of the loops in FinalizeColumns.py that would access an out-of-range index

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05 — *December 22, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Fixed a variety of bugs including accessing NONE data type, index out-of-range errors, corrected header detection method and updated .png standardization method
- Got the new Algorithm Detection method to work by increasing the minimum pixel count threshold to 10,000
- Has simple file-processing time tracker

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.1 — *December 23, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Improved per-file time tracking output structure

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.2 — *December 23, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Can now use either new or old column algorithm by setting bool at top of utils.py, USE_NEW_COLUMN_ALGORITHM
- **Known Bug:**  
  - Running program the first time CAN cause a whole slew of errors that disapper upon the second run. (Presumably this has to do with initializing EasyOCR)
---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.3 — *December 23, 2025*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- More detailed time output
- **Known Bug:**  
  - Running program the first time CAN cause a whole slew of errors that disapper upon the second run. (Presumably this has to do with initializing EasyOCR)
---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.4 — *January 11, 2026*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- **Renamed: **
        check_for_CELDT.py => check_for_CELDT_and_ELPAC.py
        rowUtilsNew.py => Row_Utilities.py
        AltFinColsHolder.py => New_Column_Algorithm.py
        FinalizeColumns.py => Old_Column_Algorithm.py
- cleaned up the code removing many print lines and removing unused commented-out code
- removed the datetime import from the utils.py file
- Moved the EasyOCR initialization line to outside of the loop in utils.py to stop redundant calls and also to hopefully fix the presumed initialization bug

---

### 🧩 Version 0.05.5 — *January 13, 2026*
**Repository:** `celdt`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- Now also produces a tsv file, tsv_output.txt (has identical info to the csv file)

---

### NEW versions below:

### 🧩 PSUSD Version 1.0 — *February 16, 2026*
**Repository:** `PSUSD`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**  
- Extracts detailed CELDT/ELPAC date and score information as well as entry / exit dates  
- entry / exit dates are extracted using the PSUSD transcripts terms of "enter" and "graduation" dates
- column detection algorithm now uses >= for the left side column instead of just >
- has added a simple string search for CELDT and ELPAC, so even if later algo fails then we can still determine that CELDT and ELPAC exist

### 🧩 PSUSD Version 1.1 — *February 16, 2026*
**Repository:** `PSUSD`  
- Supports **PDF, PNG, and JPG**   
- Caches results for each file using .pkl format and reads those if available to skip running the full pipeline

---

## 🏗️ Basic Architecture (Version 0.05.3)

The project consists of **five main functional files:**

---

### `main.py`
- Handles command-line input  
- Iterates through target folder files  
- Calls `process_image()` from `utils.py`
- tracks time stamps for each file

---

### `utils.py`
- Contains the main `process_image()` method  
- Imports utilities from `Row_Utilities.py`, `Old_Column_Algorithm.py`, and `check_for_CELDT_and_ELPAC.py`  
      (previously named `rowUtilsNew.py`, `FinalizeColumns.py`, and `check_for_CELDT.py`)
- Determines file type and routes it to `process_png()`, `process_jpg()`, or `process_pdf()`  

**Process Flow:**  
1. Converts each file to a standardized `.png` format using `pdf_to_png()`, `standardize_png()`, or `jpg_to_png()`  
2. Sends the standardized PNG to `extract_data()`  
3. For multi-page PDFs, also processes the final page and appends its results  

**`extract_data()` workflow:**  
- Runs OCR via `run_OCR()` and stores results in JSON (`convert_OCR_page_result_to_JSON()`)  
- Detects transfer worksheets using `check_for_transfer_worksheet()`  
- Cleans the image (removes text/top/bottom regions) using `removeText()`, `removeTop()`, `remove_img_bottom()`  
- Computes vertical black pixel projection (`blackPixProjProfile`)  
- Determines column positions using `check_predicted_column_values()` from `Old_Column_Algorithm.py` or `detect_four_columns` from `New_Column_Algorithm.py` (Chooses which method to use based on `USE_NEW_COLUMN_ALGORITHM` bool)
- Finds text rows via `findTextRows()`  
- Extracts entry and exit dates with `extract_entry_and_exit_dates()`  

**Returns:**  
`rows, OCR_Data_Path, transfer_worksheet_found, entry_date, exit_date, celdt_string, elpac_string`

---

### `Row_Utilities.py` formerly `rowUtilsNew.py`
- Core module for row and column analysis  
- Exports:
  - `check_header_rows_2_and_3()` *(legacy, can remove)*
  - `findTextRows()`
  - `findMatchingRowPatterns()`
- `findMatchingRowPatterns()` locates row boundaries based on course headers  
- `findTextRows()` uses OCR JSON + column positions to assign text into columns

---

### `Old_Column_Algorithm.py` formerly `FinalizeColumns.py`
- Contains `check_predicted_column_values()`  
- Uses black pixel projection profiles to identify and verify column boundaries

### `New_Column_Algorithm.py` formerly `AltFinColsHolder.py`
- Contains `check_predicted_column_values()`  
- Uses black pixel projection profiles to identify and verify column boundaries
- More efficient AND better written than the `Old_Column_Algorithm.py` counterpart

---

### `check_for_CELDT_and_ELPAC.py` formerly `check_for_CELDT.py`
- Contains `check_CELDT_ELPAC_status()`  
- Extracts CELDT and ELPAC data from text rows
- Also contains `Generic_CELDT_ELPAC_String_Check()` which simply checks the JSON OCR data for string matching

---

## 🐞 Known Issues
- Rows aren't properly detected on all transcripts, and detecing the header-line also seems to be a problem

---

*Last Updated: February 16, 2026 (PSUSD Version 1.0)*
